OSSM-5634: Creating a gateway (#80920)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/ossm-installing-gateway-using-gateway-injection.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: Concept
[id="ossm-about-gateway-injection_{context}"]
= Installing a gateway by using gateway injection
:context: ossm-installing-gateway-using-gateway-injection

This procedure explains how to install a gateway by using gateway injection.

.Prerequisites

> * You have installed the {SMProduct} Operator.

Reviewer: Should we specify that it has to be the OpenShift Service Mesh 3 Operator?

```suggestion
* You have installed the {SMProduct} 3 Operator.
```

Author: done

* You have created an {istio} control plane.
* You have created an `IstioCNI` resource.

.Procedure

. Create a namespace that you will use to install the gateway.
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create namespace <gateway_namespace>
----
+
[NOTE]
====

> Deploy the gateways associated with the service mesh in a different namespace than the namespace you use to install the {istio} control plane.

Reviewer: I think we should state that it is a best practice to install the gateway in a different namespace to the control plane namespace. It's still technically possible for users to create gateways in the control plane namespace (which is what OSSM 2 does by default).

In the suggested change I've also attempted to fit in a couple of sentences that describe two common gateway deployment topologies. Although this is brief, I think it would be helpful for users.

```suggestion
It is best practice to install the gateway in a different namespace to the one in which the {istio} control plane has been installed.

The gateway may be installed in a dedicated gateway namespace, where it can be shared by many applications operating in different namespaces. Alternatively, the gateway may be installed in an application namespace, where it serves as a dedicated gateway for the application in that namespace.
```

Author: @eoinfennessy  we are highly discouraged from specifically using the phrases "best-practice" or "Red Hat recommends" in the product doc. I doubt it would get through the editorial review  process.

Reviewer: @rh-tokeefe, that makes sense. I think it's okay to be prescriptive here. Do you think we could also include the additional topology info? I'm also suggesting a change to the sentence you have here to simplify it and keep the language consistent with the name and aim of the procedure.

```suggestion
[You should] Install the gateway in a different namespace to the namespace the {istio} control plane has been [installed / deployed] in.

The gateway may be installed in a dedicated gateway namespace, where it can be shared by many applications operating in different namespaces. Alternatively, the gateway may be installed in an application namespace, where it serves as a dedicated gateway for the application in that namespace.
```

====

> . Create a YAML file named `secret-reader.yml` that defines the `ServiceAccount`, `Role`, and `RoleBinding` for the gateway deployment. These settings enable the gateway to read `Secrets` which is required for obtaining TLS credentials.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create a YAML file named `secret-reader.yml` that defines the `ServiceAccount`, `Role`, and `RoleBinding` for the gateway deployment. These settings enable the gateway to read `Secrets`, which is required for obtaining TLS credentials.
```

Author: Done....but I hate how it renders

metadata:
  name: <gateway_name>
  namespace: <gateway_namespace>
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      istio: <gateway_name> 
  template:
    metadata:
      annotations:
        inject.istio.io/templates: gateway <1>
      labels:
        istio: <gateway_name> <2>
        sidecar.istio.io/inject: "true" <3>
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: istio-proxy
          image: auto <4>
          securityContext:
            capabilities:
              drop:
              - ALL
            allowPrivilegeEscalation: false
            privileged: false
            readOnlyRootFilesystem: true
            runAsNonRoot: true
          ports:
          - containerPort: 15090
            protocol: TCP
            name: http-envoy-prom
          resources:
            limits:
              cpu: 2000m
              memory: 1024Mi
            requests:
              cpu: 100m
              memory: 128Mi
      securityContext:
        sysctls:
        - name: net.ipv4.ip_unprivileged_port_start
          value: "0"
      serviceAccountName: secret-reader <5>
----
<1> Indicates that the {istio} control plane uses the gateway injection template instead of the default sidecar template.

> <2> Ensure that a unique label is set for the gateway deployment. A label is required so that {istio} `Gateway` resources can select gateway workloads. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<2> Ensure that a unique label is set for the gateway deployment. A unique label is required so that {istio} `Gateway` resources can select gateway workloads. 
```

Author: done

> <3> Enables gateway injection by setting the `sidecar.istio.io/inject` parameter to `true`. If the name of the {istio} resource is not `default` you must use the `istio.io/rev: <istio_revision>` label, where the revision represents the active revision of the {istio} resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<3> Enables gateway injection by setting the `sidecar.istio.io/inject` label to `true`. If the name of the {istio} resource is not `default` you must instead use the `istio.io/rev: <istio_revision>` label, where the revision represents the active revision of the {istio} resource.
```

Reviewer: I added "instead" because I think some readers could interpret this as meaning "you must _additionally_ use the `istio.io/rev: <istio_revision>` label".

Author: ok, thanks for clarifying for me. done.

<4> Sets the image field to `auto` so that the image automatically updates each time the pod starts.
<5> Sets the `serviceAccountName` to the name of the `ServiceAccount` created in the previous step.

. Apply the YAML file by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f gateway-deployment.yml
----

> . Verify that the gateway `Deployment` rollout was successful by running the following command:
> +
> [source,terminal]
> ----
> $ oc rollout status deployment/<gateway_name> -n <gateway_namespace>
> ----

Reviewer: Do we want an example output here too?

```suggestion
. Verify that the gateway `Deployment` rollout was successful by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc rollout status deployment/<gateway_name> -n <gateway_namespace>
----
+
You should see output similar to the following:
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
Waiting for deployment "<gateway_name>" rollout to finish: 0 of 1 updated replicas are available...
deployment "<gateway_name>" successfully rolled out
----
```

Author: done

. Create a YAML file named `gateway-service.yml` that contains the Kubernetes `Service` for the gateway. 
+
[source,yaml,subs="attributes,verbatim"]
----
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: <gateway_name>
  namespace: <gateway_namespace>
spec:
  type: ClusterIP <1>
  selector:
    istio: <gateway_name> <2>
  ports:
    - name: status-port
      port: 15021
      protocol: TCP
      targetPort: 15021
    - name: http2
      port: 80
      protocol: TCP
      targetPort: 80
    - name: https
      port: 443
      protocol: TCP
      targetPort: 443
----

> <1> When you  set `spec.type` to `ClusterIP` the gateway `Service` is available to traffic within the cluster. If the gateway handles ingress traffic from outside the cluster, set `spec.type` to `LoadBalancer`. Alternatively, you can use OpenShift Routes. 

Reviewer: It would be good to come back to this and a link after we have completed the "Get traffic into a mesh" section.

```suggestion
<1> When you  set `spec.type` to `ClusterIP` the gateway `Service` can only be accessed from within the cluster. If the gateway needs to handle ingress traffic from outside the cluster, set `spec.type` to `LoadBalancer`. Alternatively, you can use OpenShift Routes.
```

Author: done

.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
NAME              ENDPOINTS                             AGE
<gateway_name>    10.131.0.181:8080,10.131.0.181:8443   1m
----

. Optional: Create a YAML fle named `secret-reader.yml` that defines a `HorizontalPodAutoscaler` for the gateway. The following example sets the minimum replicas to `2` and the maximum replicas to `5` and scales the replicas up when average CPU utilization exceeds 80% of the CPU resource limit. This limit is specified in the pod template of the `Deployment` for the gateway.  
+
[source,yaml,subs="attributes,verbatim"]
----
apiVersion: autoscaling/v2
kind: HorizontalPodAutoscaler
metadata:
  name: <gateway_name>
  namespace: <gateway_namespace>
spec:
  minReplicas: 2
  maxReplicas: 5
  metrics:
  - resource:
      name: cpu
      target:
        averageUtilization: 80
        type: Utilization
    type: Resource
  scaleTargetRef:
    apiVersion: apps/v1
    kind: Deployment
    name: <gateway_name> <1>
----
<1> Set `spec.scaleTargetRef.name` to the name of the gateway `Deployment` previously created.

. Optional: Apply the YAML file by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f gateway-hpa.yml

> ----

Reviewer: Just a thought: There's quite a few of these pairs of steps that detail creating a file and then applying that file to the cluster. Could or should each pair be combined into a single step?

Author: discussed in slack and decided to keep as is.

> . Optional: Create a YAML file named `gateway-pdb` that defines a `PodDisruptionBudget` for gateway. This example allows gateway pods to be evicted only when at least 1 healthy gateway pod will remain on the cluster after the eviction. The following example uses `gateway-pdb.yml` as the name of the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Optional: Create a YAML file named `gateway-pdb.yml` that defines a `PodDisruptionBudget` for the gateway. This example allows gateway pods to be evicted only when at least 1 healthy gateway pod will remain on the cluster after the eviction.
```

Author: done

Reviewer: I think we can also delete the last sentence:

> The following example uses `gateway-pdb.yml` as the name of the file.

Author: done

            privileged: false
            readOnlyRootFilesystem: true
            runAsNonRoot: true
          ports:
          - containerPort: 15090
            protocol: TCP
            name: http-envoy-prom
          resources:
            limits:
              cpu: 2000m
              memory: 1024Mi
            requests:
              cpu: 100m
              memory: 128Mi
      securityContext:
        sysctls:
        - name: net.ipv4.ip_unprivileged_port_start
          value: "0"
      serviceAccountName: secret-reader <5>
----
<1> Indicates that the {istio} control plane uses the gateway injection template instead of the default sidecar template.
<2> Ensure that a unique label is set for the gateway deployment. A unique label is required so that {istio} `Gateway` resources can select gateway workloads. 
<3> Enables gateway injection by setting the `sidecar.istio.io/inject` label to `true`. If the name of the {istio} resource is not `default` you must use the `istio.io/rev: <istio_revision>` label, where the revision represents the active revision of the {istio} resource.
<4> Sets the image field to `auto` so that the image automatically updates each time the pod starts.

> <5> Sets the `serviceAccountName` to the name of the `ServiceAccount` created in the previous step.

Reviewer: "previous step" is no longer accurate as the step being referenced is now two steps before this.

```suggestion
<5> Sets the `serviceAccountName` to the name of the `ServiceAccount` previously created.
```

Author: done

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="ossm-about-gateway-injection_{context}"]
= Installing a gateway by using gateway injection
:context: ossm-installing-gateway-using-gateway-injection

This procedure explains how to install a gateway by using gateway injection.

.Prerequisites

* You have installed the {SMProduct} Operator version 3.0 or later.
* You have created an {istio} control plane.
* You have created an `IstioCNI` resource.

.Procedure

. Create a namespace that you will use to install the gateway.
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create namespace <gateway_namespace>
----
+
[NOTE]
====
Install the gateway and the {istio} control plane in different namespaces. 

You can install the gateway in a dedicated gateway namespace. This approach allows the gateway to be shared by many applications operating in different namespaces. Alternatively, you can install the gateway in an application namespace. In this approach, the gateway acts as a dedicated gateway for the application in that namespace.
====

> . Create a YAML file named `secret-reader.yml` that defines the `ServiceAccount`, `Role`, and `RoleBinding` for the gateway deployment. These settings enable the gateway to read `Secrets`, which is required for obtaining TLS credentials.

Author: done.

+
[source,yaml,subs="attributes,verbatim"]
----
apiVersion: v1
kind: ServiceAccount
metadata:
  name: secret-reader
  namespace: <gateway_namespace>
---
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: Role
metadata:
  name: secret-reader
  namespace: <gateway_namespace>
rules:
  - apiGroups: [""]
    resources: ["secrets"]
    verbs: ["get", "watch", "list"]
---
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: RoleBinding
metadata:
  name:  secret-reader
  namespace: <gateway_namespace>
roleRef:
  apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
  kind: Role
  name: secret-reader
subjects:
  - kind: ServiceAccount
    name:  secret-reader
----

. Apply the YAML file by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f secret-reader.yml
----

> . Create a YAML file named `gateway-deployment.yml` that defines the Kubernetes `Deployment` for the gateway. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Create a YAML file named `gateway-deployment.yml` that defines the Kubernetes `Deployment` object for the gateway. 
```

Author: done

<3> Enables gateway injection by setting the `sidecar.istio.io/inject` label to `true`. If the name of the {istio} resource is not `default` you must use the `istio.io/rev: <istio_revision>` label instead, where the revision represents the active revision of the {istio} resource.
<4> Sets the image field to `auto` so that the image automatically updates each time the pod starts.
<5> Sets the `serviceAccountName` to the name of the `ServiceAccount` created previously.

. Apply the YAML file by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f gateway-deployment.yml
----

. Verify that the gateway `Deployment` rollout was successful by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc rollout status deployment/<gateway_name> -n <gateway_namespace>
----
+
You should see output similar to the following:
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
Waiting for deployment "<gateway_name>" rollout to finish: 0 of 1 updated replicas are available...
deployment "<gateway_name>" successfully rolled out
----

> . Create a YAML file named `gateway-service.yml` that contains the Kubernetes `Service` for the gateway. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Create a YAML file named `gateway-service.yml` that contains the Kubernetes `Service` object for the gateway. 
```

Author: done

+
[source,yaml,subs="attributes,verbatim"]
----
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: <gateway_name>
  namespace: <gateway_namespace>
spec:
  type: ClusterIP <1>
  selector:
    istio: <gateway_name> <2>
  ports:
    - name: status-port
      port: 15021
      protocol: TCP
      targetPort: 15021
    - name: http2
      port: 80
      protocol: TCP
      targetPort: 80
    - name: https
      port: 443
      protocol: TCP
      targetPort: 443
----

> <1> When you  set `spec.type` to `ClusterIP` the gateway `Service` can only be accessed from within the cluster. If the gateway has to handle ingress traffic from outside the cluster, set `spec.type` to `LoadBalancer`. Alternatively, you can use OpenShift Routes. 

Reviewer 2: The "only" should go as close as possible to the term it modifies.
```suggestion
<1> When you  set `spec.type` to `ClusterIP` the gateway `Service` object can be accessed only from within the cluster. If the gateway has to handle ingress traffic from outside the cluster, set `spec.type` to `LoadBalancer`. Alternatively, you can use OpenShift Routes. 
```

Author: done

> <2> Set the `selector` to the unique label or set of labels specified in the pod template of the gateway `Deployment` that you previously created.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<2> Set the `selector` to the unique label or set of labels specified in the pod template of the gateway `Deployment` object that you previously created.
```

Author: done

. Apply the YAML file by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f gateway-service.yml
----

> . Verify that the gateway `Service` is targeting the `Endpoints` of gateway pods by running the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Verify that the gateway `Service` object is targeting the `Endpoints` object of gateway pods by running the following command:
```

Author: done

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get endpoints <gateway_name> -n <gateway_namespace>
----
+
You should see output similar to the following example:
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
NAME              ENDPOINTS                             AGE
<gateway_name>    10.131.0.181:8080,10.131.0.181:8443   1m
----

> . Optional: Create a YAML file named `gateway-hpa.yml` that defines a `HorizontalPodAutoscaler` for the gateway. The following example sets the minimum replicas to `2` and the maximum replicas to `5` and scales the replicas up when average CPU utilization exceeds 80% of the CPU resource limit. This limit is specified in the pod template of the `Deployment` for the gateway.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Optional: Create a YAML file named `gateway-hpa.yml` that defines a `HorizontalPodAutoscaler` object for the gateway. The following example sets the minimum replicas to `2` and the maximum replicas to `5` and scales the replicas up when average CPU utilization exceeds 80% of the CPU resource limit. This limit is specified in the pod template of the `Deployment` object for the gateway.  
```

Author: done

> . Optional: Create a YAML fle named `secret-reader.yml` that defines a `HorizontalPodAutoscaler` for the gateway. The following example sets the minimum replicas to `2` and the maximum replicas to `5` and scales the replicas up when average CPU utilization exceeds 80% of the CPU resource limit. This limit is specified in the pod template of the `Deployment` for the gateway.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Optional: Create a YAML fle named `gateway-hpa.yml` that defines a `HorizontalPodAutoscaler` for the gateway. The following example sets the minimum replicas to `2` and the maximum replicas to `5` and scales the replicas up when average CPU utilization exceeds 80% of the CPU resource limit. This limit is specified in the pod template of the `Deployment` for the gateway.  
```

Author: Done. Thanks for catching this @nrfox!

+
[source,yaml,subs="attributes,verbatim"]
----
apiVersion: autoscaling/v2
kind: HorizontalPodAutoscaler
metadata:
  name: <gateway_name>
  namespace: <gateway_namespace>
spec:
  minReplicas: 2
  maxReplicas: 5
  metrics:
  - resource:
      name: cpu
      target:
        averageUtilization: 80
        type: Utilization
    type: Resource
  scaleTargetRef:
    apiVersion: apps/v1
    kind: Deployment
    name: <gateway_name> <1>
----

> <1> Set `spec.scaleTargetRef.name` to the name of the gateway `Deployment` previously created.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<1> Set `spec.scaleTargetRef.name` to the name of the gateway `Deployment` object previously created.
```

Author: done

. Optional: Apply the YAML file by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f gateway-hpa.yml
----

> . Optional: Create a YAML file named `gateway-pdb.yml` that defines a `PodDisruptionBudget` for the gateway. This example allows gateway pods to be evicted only when at least 1 healthy gateway pod will remain on the cluster after the eviction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Optional: Create a YAML file named `gateway-pdb.yml` that defines a `PodDisruptionBudget` object for the gateway. The following example allows gateway pods to be evicted only when at least 1 healthy gateway pod will remain on the cluster after the eviction.
```

Author: done

+
[source,yaml,subs="attributes,verbatim"]
----
apiVersion: policy/v1
kind: PodDisruptionBudget
metadata:
  name: <gateway_name>
  namespace: <gateway_namespace>
spec:
  minAvailable: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      istio: <gateway_name> <1>
----

> <1> Set the `spec.selector.matchLabels` to the unique label or set of labels specified in the pod template of the gateway `Deployment` prevously created.

Author: done

> <1> Set the `spec.selector.matchLabels` to the unique label or set of labels specified in the pod template of the gateway `Deployment` previously created.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<1> Set the `spec.selector.matchLabels` to the unique label or set of labels specified in the pod template of the gateway `Deployment` object previously created.
```

Author: done
